>> LILOU: Hello, my
juicy co-creators.
Lilou here.
I'm in London in
England with Davina.
Hello.
>> DAVINA MACKAIL: Hello, Lilou.
It's just delightful
to be here with you.
>> LILOU: I know, and
we're going to have such
a-- I'm as excited as you
are, because I love speaking
of the spiritual,
enlightening, divine topics,
shamanistic topics.
And I know you're
all about that.
You're one of the
Hay House authors.
You wrote "The Dream Whisperer."
Is that right?
Where did that title come from?
>> MACKAIL: Well, because who
whispers your dreams to you?
>> LILOU: That's
a good question.
>> MACKAIL: Yeah.
Exactly.
That's what my whole book's
about, that question.
Because it was like, who
whispers those dreams?
They're such profound messages.
And for me, dreams have
so many different layers.
A dream can be
obvious in the moment
and you think, oh,
yeah, I see how
that relates to my day or my
life or what's going on for me.
And then the same dream can have
a prophetic quality many years
later where you
think, oh my god,
that's that dream
from years ago.
I'm living it in this moment.
So they're very mysterious.
And you think, who
whispers our dreams to us?
Where do they come from?
So really that's where
the title came from.
>> LILOU: Because I know
you have not just a little
but a big shamanic approach
to your work, I feel, no?
>> MACKAIL: Yeah.
>> LILOU: So I guess we're going
to speak of the spirit world
somehow.
>> MACKAIL: We are certainly
going to speak of the spirit
world.
For me, I am a shaman.
That's my whole way
of living and being.
And shamanism found me
and continues to find me.
It's a tough road
to walk sometimes,
and I don't think I would
have voluntarily chosen it
if I had ended up in some of
the experiences I've ended up
in life.
However, I wouldn't
change anything either.
But spirit keeps
bringing it towards me,
and it's like you are going
to walk this path, girl,
whether you like it or not.
And it keeps turning up,
and it keeps turning up,
however much I say, OK, I've had
enough now, I want to go home,
I want to go, it just
keeps showing up.
I first met a shaman in the
mid '90s when I was actually
doing a feng shui training
in Reading in England,
of all places.
And we flew in teachers
from all around the world,
because there was two
feng shui books when
I learned-- now there are
bookshelves full of them--
and we had to fly in
teachers all over the world,
because there just
wasn't the people there
with the knowledge.
And one of these
guys was not really
anything to do with
feng shui, but he
had some architectural
experience
and he knew about the landscape.
But he came in with
his shamanic ways,
and I just fell in
love with what he did.
We were actually in
Wayland's Smithy,
which is a burial
site in the UK.
And we were in this cave, and he
had a pipitu, which is a shell,
like a conch shell,
and that's all he had.
And there were just
six of us in this cave,
and my experience in that
evening was extraordinary.
I could hear a choir of
angels, this beautiful music.
And I wanted to open
my eyes at one point.
We were just meditating.
And I thought,
god, how has he got
all those instruments playing?
Has he put a tape machine
on while we weren't looking?
Has he got a secret microphone
in his pocket or something?
And when we came out,
everyone said, oh my god,
did you hear that music?
There was a host of angels
in that little cave with us.
And all he had was the shell.
And what he created in
terms of the spirit--
and I just thought, I want
to know how he does that.
That's what I want to know.
And so I trained
him for the next,
well, seven years in
total, sometimes in the UK,
sometimes in America,
sometimes in Ireland,
sometimes in different
parts of, as I say, America.
But from there I continued my
training with the Q'ero Indians
in Peru itself really
high up in the Andes,
really up in that bright
light consciousness
of the mountains and the Apus.
They call them
Apus, and they are
the teachers, the mountains,
in that tradition.
And it's a beautiful tradition,
really beautiful tradition.
>> LILOU: Tell us about the
shadow aspect or the darker
side, if we can say, or the
scary part that you can face
when you're starting to be in
a shamanic journey or that you
might have faced yourself
and deal with, I guess,
to bring more light into
your life and to us.
>> MACKAIL: Yeah.
For me, there is only
one way to the light,
and that's through the dark.
It's the yin and yang.
Within the extreme of one
is always its opposite.
And I think my early
spiritual journey
through feng shui and the whole
New Age movement was very much,
oh, light a candle, call in
the angels, it's all light
and love.
And of course, then what happens
is, because nobody knew really
how to deal with the
shadow or we're not
addressing the
shadow, what occurred
in my experience of really being
on this path in the early '90s
was everyone was
bitching at everybody.
And I'm like, hang on, this
is meant to be feng shui.
It's all about balance, love,
and harmony in the home,
and everyone's at each other's
throats in competition.
Where's that coming from?
And shamanism, for me, was
such a relief to come home to.
It was such an eye-opener,
because shamanism
is all about the shadow.
It's all about, really,
as Jung would say,
the individuation of the self.
It's dealing with that
unconscious elements,
the disowned aspects of self
that when we deal with that,
that's how we become whole.
And I think people get the
wrong idea about the shadow.
Is like, oh, I can't admit
that I'm a bad person
or that I've got these awful
angry, jealous thoughts going
through my head.
But we have free choice.
We have a moral
compass that can allow
us to know whether we act
out on those bad thoughts,
and that's our choice.
But we just have to own
that we have the potential.
And I think that's really
what brings us into wholeness.
And really, if we look at
our world in terms of light
and dark or the
shadow and the light,
however you want
to interpret it,
there is just one basic
argument that causes separation,
and it's I'm right,
you're wrong.
Every argument comes
down to that core tenant.
And in a sense, shamanism
is saying, well, I'm right,
and you're right or I'm
wrong, and you're wrong.
Rather than this or
that, it's this and that.
And it's being able to
hold the paradox of that
which allows us to transcend.
So there are many dark
nights of the soul
I've spent on my
shamanic journey.
I have literally had at least
three near-death experiences,
I mean physical
near-death experiences,
two from very high altitude,
one from just getting very, very
sick.
And yes, they are
part of that journey.
But funnily enough, they
possibly weren't the worst.
Some of it is just the
uncovering of our layers
of conditioning and
habituated selves.
And I think maybe it's
worth explaining to viewers
where the shadow comes from.
Anybody that's
mothers out there,
you've all experienced this.
You see your child,
and the child
is happy, sad, angry,
guilty, shameful,
all in space of
about three seconds.
It doesn't really have
anything between its emotions.
It can have all of
them in the same hour.
And then when we get to
two or three years old,
we start to condition the child.
Oh, don't do that.
Take your elbows off.
No, no, no, you
mustn't have that.
No, that's dangerous.
And the child at
two or three doesn't
understand what's happening.
All it knows is that,
in the ideal family,
it had this incredible love.
Oh, look, I can do no wrong.
My parents love me.
Everything I do is
accepted and loved.
And then suddenly it wasn't or
isn't, and they don't know why.
All the child experiences
is loss of love.
It's like, oh, I don't
know what I've done wrong,
but I can feel that isn't
a good thing anymore.
And so a child very
quickly learns--
and every culture
has the same, but we
have different rules
for it, if you like.
And we all get rewarded
for our good behavior
and punished for our bad.
So we very quickly
learn to show up
as our good,
smiley, happy selves
and hide all the other
stuff in a bag behind us,
tie an knot in it and
pretend it doesn't exist.
And there is your shadow.
And as we grow older,
the things that kind of
push our buttons
in life, the things
that aggravate us
often reflected
in our nearest and dearest,
our most intimate partners,
our friends, our
family, they're always
going to be the ones
that push the buttons,
because they are your
unacknowledged shadow showing
up to go, hello, I'm
still part of you,
you just have to own me,
and then I'll disappear.
It's not about resisting it.
It's not about
having to act it out.
It's acknowledging
the potential.
We are both the murderer
and the murdered,
the rapist and the raped,
the abuser and the abused.
And we don't have to
act it out, but we
have to acknowledge
the potential
that we have within us.
>> LILOU: But on a spirit
level, from my understanding,
there's pieces
maybe of the soul.
Like in the shamanic
journey, there
seems to be some kind of rituals
to bring those pieces back
together that were kind
of lost and maybe so hurt
that part of us decided
to kind of leave this body
or not be really present
in those moments.
And there's a lot of people
that become numb in the society
also.
So is that something that you
also deal with on a soul level
as well?
Because right now I'm hearing
that the childhood and as
kids when we got hurt, you know?
>> MACKAIL: I think, yes.
I hear what you're saying.
I think they're slightly
different aspects.
And the soul retrieval often
comes through trauma, actually.
So in Peruvian cosmology
that I've mostly trained in,
if you have an accident
or you're shocked,
you get a big fright,
that will cause soul loss.
So literally bits
of your soul can
get splintered out of the body.
And yeah, there are processes
to bring back to wholeness
and call the soul
back home and to call
those disparate parts
of the soul home.
>> LILOU: Yeah.
>> MACKAIL: So from
that perspective, yes.
>> LILOU: Yeah.
But in general, the
shamanism that you talk about
is to heal, then.
It's more like a
healing aspect of--
>> MACKAIL: It's a way of life.
Yes, there are
healing modalities.
So I do work as a
shamanic healer.
I personally believe
no one heals anyone.
All my job is to--
I think, really,
the shaman's job
generally, the shaman
doesn't actually do anything.
What the shaman does is
line up the dominoes.
Because when you have
the dominoes lined up,
the magic happens all on itself.
And that's what the
shaman's skilled at,
and that's what the
shaman's trained in,
in how to set the space,
how to get everything
in perfect alignment so
that spirit can show up
in a truly magical way
and allow the healing
and facilitate the true
healing that needs to occur.
It's not me, and
it's no other shaman.
It's not a human.
Do you know what I mean?
But we do have skills in
being able to set the space
to create that facility.
>> LILOU: So related to
living our highest potential
and your book, "The
Dream Whisper,"
is that kind of like in the
dream, then, the spirit?
Or there's pieces-- What
happens during the dream?
How does this
message come through?
>> MACKAIL: In many
different ways.
There's lots of
shamanic practices
within the book on how
to work with dreams.
Because in shamanic cultures
they discuss dreams.
In the morning, they have
meetings with the elders
and the council
of the community,
and it's like, well what
did you dream last night?
And they believe in
the communal dream.
They maybe actually
set dreams, like where
are the best hunting
grounds going to be?
Where are we going
to get our best food?
Where is the best place
to plant the crops?
Is it time to put the
alpacas to bed yet?
Whatever it might be.
And they will use
dreams in that way.
I think in a more
modern Western context,
for me our dreams are
an untapped resource
of creativity.
I think dreams are
so powerful, and I
don't believe anything in
the human biology is wasted.
And it's like, why
do we have dreams?
And I think they're
multifunctional.
I do think they
balance our psyches.
For example, there's a
really interesting thing.
If we look at the
time of Freud, Freud
believed, in his
interpretation, that all dreams
had a sexual kind of message.
He related the most
extraordinary things to sex,
in terms of dream symbolism.
But if we look at the context
within which he operated,
he operated in Victorian times,
the most repressed sexual age.
So probably the dreams he got
coming through his therapy room
were mostly about sex.
Because your dream will
balance your psyche,
so it will be a
representation of what's
not expressed in your living.
So dreams will be an expression
of what you're not living out,
if it's out of
balance in your life.
For example, often women
that go on extreme diets
will often start
dreaming about food
and stuffing their
faces in the dreams,
because they're denying
themselves in reality.
Our body, our biology,
and our psyche
is always trying to come
into a homeostatic state,
a state of balance.
So dreams have that function.
But actually what happens to
the neurology in the brain
when we're in dream sleep
is that all the logical,
rational chemicals get
switched off, and all
our most creative
chemicals get switched on.
So we literally are
solution-seeking missiles
when we're in dream sleep.
We are programmed to
be really creative.
And it's why, if you do the
research, most of our Nobel
Prize winners, true creatives,
writers, poets, most of them,
if you investigate it,
have had inspiration
from the dream world.
Most Nobel prize winners
have either dreamt part
of the solution to their
theorem or an experiment to try.
Einstein, for example, he dreamt
about the theory of relativity.
Now the thing is
it seems obvious,
but what he actually dreamt--
and he had this dream
when he was 19
years old-- and he
dreamt that he was
on a toboggan and he
was coming down a ski slope
really, really fast, so fast
whizzing down until it
fractured into light, the speed
that he was coming.
Now he woke up from
that dream at 19.
It took him some time to come up
with the theory of relativity.
But he knew there was something
significant in the dream,
and he just kept exploring
it within his psyche.
And he was a champion dreamer.
Einstein really understood
the power of sleep.
If he was really working
on a juicy project,
he'd make sure he
got 12 hours a night.
When do we ever give
ourselves that these days?
We're in a sleep
deprivation culture.
We've lost the art of dreaming.
We don't even really acknowledge
that we need sleep anymore
in this information
overload age.
So I think it's
really interesting.
But for me, what I'm
interested in in the book
and what the book
is about is less
to do with healing one's
psyche through the dreams
but more about how can we
utilize this resource at night
in order to progress our lives,
to find our soul's journey,
to find our heart's truth?
So a really great technique
that's really simple
is give your dreams
some context.
Because otherwise, when
you go to sleep at night
you could just dream
about anything,
and the dream that
comes up could
be to do with any
aspect of your life.
Whereas if you program
your dream and go,
OK, I really would love a clear
dream that I remember on X,
or what do I most
need to know about Y,
and then your dream
will have context,
particularly if it's the
last thing you think about
as you're going into sleep.
And then the information
that you get from the dream
is much more useful.
Because a lot of
viewers will go, oh, but
I never remember my dreams.
I don't dream.
And of course, everyone dreams.
We just don't always
remember them.
And there's a couple
of really good tricks.
The first one is dreams seem to
be located in time and space.
So it's really important
that when you first wake up
in the morning you just
stay perfectly still.
Don't move.
Don't jump out of bed.
Don't go for a pee.
Don't go and do all
those normal things.
It's difficult if you're a mom
when the young kids are jumping
all over you, so maybe
not your dream time.
But otherwise, just
lie perfectly still,
and you just ask yourself,
what was I last thinking?
What was I last feeling?
Where was I just now?
And you'll be amazed
at the recall.
A couple of weeks of
that-- you might only
get a few snippets to begin
with, but in two weeks,
I think anyone can train
themselves to be good dreamer
and to remember.
And it's about intention.
We have something in the
brain called the reticular
activating system.
Not a particularly
nifty little name,
but it's quite a nifty device.
And you've had an
experience with this
if you've ever bought a new
car in a particular color,
never really particularly
noticed it before,
and then suddenly as soon
as you drive this car
it seems like every
other car on the road
is your car in your color.
Now they didn't make 500,000
more cars like that overnight.
What it is is your
perceptual awareness
didn't need that
information before,
but now it's taken it in, so
it includes it in your vision.
And the same with dreams.
We don't pay
attention to dreams.
So if you say, I'm really
interested in dreams.
Even people listening
to this interview
have got a higher
percentage chance
of having a dream
they'll remember
when they've heard this.
Because just activating
that requirement
or that desire for
dreaming in their mind
activates the reticular
activating system,
and the unconscious
mind goes, oh, yeah,
finally they're going to
listen to the dreams, great.
Let's give them some juicy ones.
>> LILOU: Yeah.
Yeah.
>> MACKAIL: So it really
does wake that part of us up.
But for me, dreams are an
untapped creative resource.
We have it in our language.
You say, well, I'll sleep
on it, and you sometimes
wake up with the answer.
But we think it's
just because we've
rested and had a
good night's sleep.
But it's not.
It's because your
creative chemicals
have been working on the problem
during the night when you've
let go of the rational
need to focus on your life
and live in a conscious way.
So it's really powerful.
>> LILOU: So how do
we go on about it?
Because I had interviewed
Charlie Morley
on lucid dreaming, so this is
a different conversation here
I feel.
But how do we go about it if
we have this recollection?
Do we hit it more
on the feelings
or on the details of the dream?
Or do we start interpreting it?
Because there's
so many different
currents about
looking at dreams.
>> MACKAIL: There are.
And for me, Charlie
Morley's lucid dreaming,
I don't focus so much
on that, because there
are other people that do it,
like him and Stephen LaBerge,
is also excellent
on that subject.
And certainly, I think it's
a really good practice.
But I think we can get
a lot out of our dreams.
And for me, in my experience
of working with people,
I don't think everyone is
prone to lucid dreaming.
I think some people are more
prone to it than others,
in my experience.
But normal dreams can be worked
on a number of different ways.
One of the biggest things
is write them down,
because one dream in isolation
isn't actually that useful.
Dreams when you've
got two years of them
or several months of them, then
it becomes really powerful.
And one of the
most powerful ways
is to just keep
writing them down,
not really pay too
much attention.
And then periodically, maybe
every couple of months,
read them, starting with
the most recent first.
Undisturbed, read
them backwards,
all the way up to the point
where you want, and then just
write down the common themes.
And you will notice
just how many --
even though the dreams all seem
different, all seem random,
whatever, you'll suddenly notice
all these patterns and themes
are continually showing up.
And what we have to do is
learn our own dream language.
I think you're the
only personal that
can really interpret your dream.
Yes, I have a mind,
and I have a lot
of metaphysical symbolic
awareness because
of the things I've trained
in, so I can give people
real pointers and helpers of
where the area of their dream
is likely to be.
But really, you're
the one that's
going to get that, oh,
god, yeah, that's it.
That's what that dream meant.
And we have to learn our
own dream language, which
we only do through practice,
through journaling,
through writing it down,
through paying attention.
Because you'll maybe always
get a tree in your dream,
and I might always get
a tree in my dream.
It's a recurring theme.
But for you, it might be
to do with your family tree
and, say, your grandfather
or something to do with him
and that's the way he shows up.
For me, it might be a tree I
fell out of when I was a kid
and broke my arm, so there's
still some trauma associated.
So it's going to be
individual on that level.
>> LILOU: Yeah.
Can we classify them
in different ways?
>> MACKAIL: I used
to think that,
and my book kind of
says that in a way.
But since the few years
since I've written the book,
I'm not so sure anymore.
I'm really changing my
own views on dreams,
the deeper I'm
working with them.
And it's what I really
spoke about earlier.
I think the same dream
can have a number
of different levels
of interpretation.
I think it can be, as I say,
just the day-to-day psyche,
the balancing.
You can see why it's showing up.
And then it can have a
prophetic quality later on,
and it can also be
something maybe coming in
from the-- I think the
quality of dreams--
and again, one has to really
become in dialogue with one's
own dream landscape.
So for example, I get what
I call medicine dreams,
shamanic medicine dreams.
And I'll be in ceremony.
They are definitely
not of this realm.
And I know them-- they
have a different quality.
They have a
different experience.
And I just thought,
wow, this is coming
from some other shamanic realm.
This is coming from a
spiritual realm, whatever.
They're not my day-to-day--
>> LILOU: Those
are the cool ones.
>> MACKAIL: Yeah.
They are the cool ones, yeah.
I have great dreams.
My favorite dream of all
time for myself was I
was an intergalactic planetary
investigator-- it's great.
What a great job.
I so want that on
my business card--
and I ended up on this
planet governed by love.
And there was this council
of elders in the forest,
and it was really weird.
And I said, well, how
is this planet governed?
And they said, oh, by love.
And I said, well, what
do you mean by that?
And they said, well, try
and think of something.
And even in the dream--
this was like a really weird
lucid moment-- I tried
to think of an old issue
that I was actually
experiencing in my life,
and it was like I
couldn't think of it
in the way I used to
think of it in the dream.
It was like I could only think
of it through the eyes of love.
>> LILOU: That makes
a big difference.
>> MACKAIL: Yeah.
It makes a huge difference.
And then it was a
tree of life dream,
and there was this massive
world tree uprooted.
And it became a highway with
everything on that highway.
It looked empty
until we got on it.
Because this woman invited
me, from the council,
she invited me home for tea.
And
There was just divine light
at the end of the tree,
and we were on this highway, and
there was people on unicycles,
and there was gnomes and
elves and fairies and pixies
and magicians.
The whole world was on that
world tree going up and down.
It was very full of traffic.
And it was just
this extraordinary--
And we were just literally
heading up towards the light
through all the
levels of the worlds.
It was a fabulous dream.
>> LILOU: You wanted
to stay there.
>> MACKAIL: Yeah.
I did want to stay there, yeah.
>> LILOU: I remember dreaming
of the akashic records.
I was clearly in this thing.
It was surreal, and it
lasted for a long time.
Is time the same in dream world?
>> MACKAIL: Well,
it's interesting.
According to scientific
research, yes,
you dream in real time.
But it's a little
bit like, though, I
think there is such a
thing as psychological time
as well as chronos time.
So there's chronos, linear,
tick-tock, tick-tock, seconds
passing, minutes
gathering, but then there
is psychological time.
And you've always experienced
that in meditation.
So sometimes you can be in
meditation for 10 minutes,
and it feels like 300 years.
And other times, you can be
in meditation for 10 minutes,
and it feels like 3 seconds.
So that's psychological time.
If you're doing something you
really love and absorbed in,
time disappears.
If you waiting for a bus,
time takes a very long time,
you know?
So that's the kind
of dreaming, I
think, the time that
occurs in dreaming.
>> LILOU: Yeah.
So once we start to
remember our dreams,
do we also write
the synchronicities
that happened during the day?
Because it seems like there is
a correlation too with what's
going on.
So how can we make the
most out of all this?
>> MACKAIL: For me, your
dreams are like your internal
therapist.
So you don't have to
go and pay for someone.
Just pay attention to your
dreams, and write them down.
So it's like a
dialogue with yourself.
>> LILOU: Yeah.
>> MACKAIL: For me, the most
useful thing with dreams is
to ask a question.
What do I need to
know about this?
Because then you've got
context, and then you
can see the dream in relation
to the question you've asked,
and you will see much more
easily able to interpret it,
basically, because you'll
see the correlation.
You will get to know
your dream symbols,
because you will have certain
things that consistently show
up in your dreams, even
in different contexts,
like a particular
cat or, I don't know,
a tree or house or something.
So you get to know
your dreamscape.
And then, for example, maybe
you have recurring dreams.
Now I always find recurring
dreams really interesting,
and these are really
useful to work with.
And I recommend anyone that's
having a recurring dream
looks at it.
Because we have perfect biology.
Why is it going to keep
playing the same dream out
like some old stuck record?
And for me, really what we
have is the world of Me,
Incorporated.
We are, as a human being, we're
a well-functioning company,
hopefully.
And the conscious
mind, the bit you and I
are having a conversation
with right now,
that's the boss of the company.
It's in charge, it makes
all the decisions, but not
terribly bright half the time.
And we've all worked, probably,
for companies like that.
But the unconscious
mind, the world
of the dreams, the water,
the memories that we carry,
the genetic cellular
memories-- and that
also comes up in dreams.
They can be memory dreams,
too-- that has the wisdom,
but it's the servant
of the conscious mind.
It does not have free will.
So for me, it's like our dreams
are our nighttime management
report.
Now mostly in a
company, the workforce
just get on and run the
company, don't they?
They just know their job.
They do their job.
But every now and again,
they've got to go to the boss
because they don't know
how to solve a problem.
They're going, you know what?
This has come up, and I
don't know how to solve it.
And that, for me, is
a recurring dream.
It's like the recurring
dream is going,
we can't solve this for you.
We can't sort this out.
You need to actually
pay conscious attention
to what's going on here.
Maybe there's a
repressed emotional issue
that needs to be dealt with.
Maybe there's some
old trauma in there.
Post-Traumatic Stress
Syndrome is often
one that will cause those
recurring dreams, things
of that nature.
But often there's an original
incident that preempted it.
And what happens is
with a recurring dream,
there may be that
original issue.
And then when a similar
emotional problem occurs,
you'll get the same
dream, because it's
a similar emotional resonance.
So it's like, yeah, this is
similar to what you experienced
before, and you haven't
dealt with this yet.
So those ones are really
worth paying attention.
So it's an art.
It's not a precise science.
It does require a level
of emotional intelligence
to be able to look
at your stuff.
Most of us want to
hide from our stuff,
and we don't really want to
face those darker aspects,
and we don't really want
to admit that, oh, actually
there's stuff I've got
to deal with there.
I'm not a perfect
person after all.
Damn.
[SIGHS] Missed
that day at school
when they were giving
out the perfect cards.
So it does require a particular
quality of attitude of going,
wow, I'm this great big messy,
fabulous, gorgeous individual,
and I'm going to accept all of
my great big messy loveliness,
rather than needing
it all to be perfect.
>> LILOU: Yeah.
Yeah.
And the relationship with
shamanism, during the sleep
I guess the soul also expresses.
Or is it only the subconscious?
>> MACKAIL: It's a very
difficult question.
Who knows, really, is the
ultimate answer to that?
From a shamanic perspective,
most indigenous cultures
would look at the dreaming
world slightly different,
and they would see it that we
go astral traveling, that we're
visiting other realms and
dimensions during our dream
sleep, and that that
is the soul journeying
to go to other places.
For me, personally,
I think it's both.
I'm aware that some of my dreams
absolutely are astral travel
dreams, and that is my soul
journeying to other dimensions.
And I'm also aware
that on most levels
my dreaming is just my
unconscious mind processing
stuff.
So I think both are true.
Now from a shamanic
cultural perspective,
also they would
consider this world,
you and I sitting on this
sofa having an interview,
as a dream, that
we're dreaming this.
>> LILOU: Exactly.
Can we say life is a dream?
>> MACKAIL: Yeah, that's right.
Because really what we
take in through our eyes
isn't true anyway.
It's just data and electricity.
We make this up,
so this is a dream.
And from a shamanic
perspective, there
is something really
much more magical.
And that always reminds
me of that old story.
This is one I'm sure you've
heard on this show before,
maybe.
In one of the islands
of Hawaii when--
>> LILOU: I love Hawaii.
I mean, hmm.
The owner of Gaiam,
I met him in Kawaii.
That's how this whole
journey-- I love Kawaii.
Special, big kisses to all the
dolphins out there, oh my god.
>> MACKAIL: Too right.
Absolutely.
But when they were
being invaded in the
Christopher-Columbus-type ages,
the medicine man of the village
-- the ship had parked
offshore or anchored offshore,
and nobody could see the ship
because they literally did not
have it in their consciousness.
They'd never seen a ship
before, because they
didn't know what
one looked like.
And it was the shaman, he knew
something wasn't quite right.
And eventually he started to
watch the surface of the ocean,
and he noticed that the wave
patterns were different.
Because that's
what he understood.
He understood the ocean.
He'd watched it every day of
his life, so he knew it well.
And through him observing
the different patterns,
the ship became able to be seen.
And then he was able to
teach his community how
to see the ship and said, look
at the ocean, and then the ship
appeared.
So it's very interesting, this
seeing/believing, believing
is seeing.
That did not exist, because
it wasn't in their mind,
and then it was.
And really, that's how it works.
>> LILOU: Yeah.
Yeah.
We can't really see it when
it's not in our conscious.
Our unconscious?
80% is back there?
Is that right?
>> MACKAIL: Well, apparently
our conscious mind can only hold
about five or six bits
of information at once,
so most of it is run
in the unconscious.
But it's like this
massive filing system
that's just taking every
bit of millions of data
in all the time.
But it's interesting.
Nothing in this world,
man made that is,
exists other than lest
someone imagined it first.
So also this is
another great skill
of the shaman is imagination.
And I'm sure that's
why I became a shaman,
because my mother when I was
a child was always saying,
the trouble with you,
girl, too much imagination.
Now it's my greatest gift.
I'm thinking, thank god, I've
got a fantastic imagination.
It rocks.
Thank god for that.
>> LILOU: Yeah.
It's interesting to
see you as a shaman.
Because when we see
you from the outside,
we would never imagine that.
So there is quite a--
>> MACKAIL: The shamans
are always secret.
They always walk
between the worlds.
Because a shaman's true nature
is to walk between the worlds.
So I need to be able
to just sit here
having a perfectly
posh interview with you
on a sofa with you in a
lovely flat in London, right?
Because if I turned up with my
condor feathers and my poncho
and all the rest of it,
you might be quite excited,
but somebody else might
not let me in the door.
One of my shamanic
teachers taught me this.
It was brilliant.
We were up in the mountains
in Peru going to a pilgrimage
to Salkantay.
It was tough.
We're out doing
medicine, we're working
with the land, and
everything like that,
and somebody asked
him a question.
He said, oh, let's google it.
And it was just brilliant.
I just fell about laughing.
There we are in the
middle of the mountains.
He's an indigenous shaman.
I originally worked with his
grandfather, who's now passed,
and he's the grandson.
But he was a proper
initiate, literally hit
by lightning, nearly
died in a ditch,
which is the absolute
true shamanic initiation
of that tradition.
>> LILOU: Really?
Whoa.
>> MACKAIL: He's an enlightened
being, but he's young.
>> LILOU: Literally.
>> MACKAIL: Yeah, literally
an enlightened being.
But he's so full of wisdom.
And he's only in his 30s,
a really remarkable person.
But he walks the worlds.
And I said, oh, Puma, you're
so good with the technology.
And he said, no, you need to be.
He said, you need to
master it, Davina.
He said, that is a true
shaman, mastery of all words,
so including the technosphere,
including this conscious living
world.
That's really what
they talk about when
they walk between the worlds.
It's being able to find yourself
in any situation and adapt.
>> LILOU: Part of finding our
highest potential is finding
that spirit within us or
allowing it to really show us
the way.
What is your view on really
living our highest potential,
since you're all about that?
>> MACKAIL: Get
out of our own way.
The biggest issue
in why none of us
live or find it hard to
live our truest potential
is we get in our own way.
We allow our habituated
conditioned minds
to rule us with their dogma.
The conditioning is
so insidious that it's
really tough to
break through it.
Even this whole kind of
concept of Monday to Friday,
weekends off, three
meals a day, that's
come from the
Industrial Revolution.
It's not true.
But if you start questioning
most people on the street,
they'll go, what do you mean?
I missed lunch.
I'm going to die in a minute.
Well, no, actually, you're not.
It's not even healthy to
have three meals a day.
And just, oh, I need
eight hours of sleep.
Where's that come from?
Even at that basic
level, we have
unpick all that
conditioning in order
to even begin to glimpse
our highest potential.
And I think it takes enormous
courage to live your truth,
to be brave enough to
go against the grain,
to be able to go against
perhaps what your family
and friends would
wish for you and go,
actually, I'm just going to
go and walk the road less
traveled, because this
is what my calling is.
And it's often a
very lonely path,
because people mostly think
you're just mad or crazy
or have lost the plot.
My mother's always
saying, when are
you going to get a
proper job, love?
Is it time yet?
And it's like, well, no, mom.
It's not, because
this is what I love.
And even for me,
I constantly have
to check and take off the
layers, take off the layers,
take off the layers to allow the
authenticity to come through.
And that's the biggest thing
is to let go let go, let god,
if you like.
And that's probably
the hardest thing.
You've got to be able to
spend time in solitude
with yourself, because it is
the only way you will ever
get quiet enough to hear
the voice of your heart.
You heart whispers.
It does not shout.
And you have to be really quiet
and really internal to hear
the truth of what your heart is.
Your mind's the one that's
shouting all the damn time.
It makes such a flipping racket
in there, good old monkey mind,
like the chattering trees
in the forest, right?
Look at the difference.
>> LILOU: That's when
you take ayahuasca.
Go on.
>> MACKAIL: Yeah, it is when
I take ayahuasca and all
of those.
And I do work with
the plant medicines,
because they, for me,
are master teachers.
They're extraordinary.
And we ultimately
come from the plants.
Without the plants, none of
us would be on this planet.
So they are true
teachers, and I've
seen such miraculous
healings that I
do believe they have
divine intelligence
and they really work
through our DNA.
But just in terms of the
everyday, it is about --
ayni is one of the most powerful
concepts of the Peruvian
cosmology from
the Q'ero Indians,
who are direct
descendants of the Inca.
And ayni is sacred exchange.
>> LILOU: Ayni.
>> MACKAIL: Ayni, A-Y-N-I, ayni.
And it's basically
sacred reciprocity.
It's like nothing goes one way.
So smile at the world,
the world will smile back.
>> LILOU: There seems to
be, as you said earlier,
we're born into something.
There's a certain conditioning.
But there is chatter.
There's this chatting.
There's this kind of noise
or this way of thinking
that is not even ours sometimes.
We're just like, where did
that thought come from?
Is that part of the things,
I guess, holding us back too?
How can we deal with
that part of the--
If we dream about that, or if
we make choices in our life
with that type of
it's not even ours,
how do we even deal with that?
We just cut the cords?
>> MACKAIL: Well,
give me an example.
I'm not clear on what
you're asking me.
>> LILOU: I don't have
any precise example.
Not hearing some voice, but
like when you're depressed
or when you're insecure
about something,
it may be the insecurity
of somebody else.
As we're becoming more
sensitive, more open, more
transparent, and
hopefully more authentic,
we feel things more and more.
And it feels like it could have
a disconnect too with is it
mine?
Am I intuitively feeling that?
Is that part of the
work that I need to do?
And I think more and more of
us feel this way-- is it mine?
Is it others?-- so that we
can live more fully even more
and just being present
instead of being in our minds.
>> MACKAIL: I think there is
no such thing as separation.
>> LILOU: Yeah.
>> MACKAIL: So you are another
me, and I am another you.
>> LILOU: Yeah.
>> MACKAIL: So from
that perspective,
what's mine and what's yours?
It's all one.
>> LILOU: Yeah.
So big cities like London...
>> MACKAIL: Yeah,
but that is it.
And for me, the more open
and free-flowing we are,
the easier our flow is.
It's still back to that concept
let go, let god, let spirit,
whatever you want to call it.
Because think about the ocean.
The ocean is free-flowing.
OK?
The fish and the
things and everything
flows through the ocean.
That's the water in our bodies.
We are free-flowing creatures.
We're full of liquid.
And yet in the ocean
it's the steel ship,
the man-made object,
the conditioning,
if you like, the
habituated mind that
collects the gnarly old
barnacles on its bottom.
Now the barnacles can
only hold onto the ship
because it's steel.
It's solid.
So when we get experiences
in life that are less than
or we perceive them to be less
than, we get hurt by them,
boyfriend leaves us,
girlfriend leaves us,
we have a breakdown
of some sort,
we have some perceived
hurt, we tend
to put a little bit of
steel around our heart.
We cage our heart, and
then the barnacles stick.
So what you're talking
about in terms of picking up
other people's toxic energy,
we can only pick it up
if we're already closed,
because then it sticks.
Bad energy sticks
to bad energy--
>> LILOU: Yeah.
Yeah.
>> MACKAIL: --like barnacles
on the bottom of a ship.
If your heart is fully open,
there's nothing to-- Well,
it just flows through.
>> LILOU: Beautiful.
>> MACKAIL: And because emotions
are simply energy in motion,
we are not never going to
experience a bad emotion.
Of course we're
going to feel all
of those emotions
all of the time.
We want to be back like
children, angry, sad, happy,
and joyful all in three seconds.
It's what happens
with humans, we
tend to want to hold
onto our bad emotions
for some crazy reason.
So we lock them
down, or we don't
feel safe to express them
and go, god, I'm pissed off,
or I'm angry in this
moment, or whatever.
I'm raging.
And then it's just
done, breathed out.
Oh, OK, got that.
Moving on swiftly.
And it's just allowing
the flow of emotions.
Don't put them in
the pressure cooker.
Don't stick a lid on them.
Don't let them stick to us.
And I think that's the
hardest thing, because we
are we taught about heartbreak.
We are taught, oh my god, that
poor person, all the pain,
all the loss, all this.
And so it's like we have to
wear it like a badge of honor.
It's bullshit, frankly.
Sorry, but it is.
It's just like, let it go.
Keep letting go.
There's a brilliant,
brilliant exercise.
I don't know if I can
do an exercise on this.
>> LILOU: Oh, yeah.
Bring it on.
>> MACKAIL: Yeah.
This is really simple.
And especially with the
holiday season coming up,
it's good for helping.
And the sacral chakra, which
is two fingers below your belly
button-- it's called hucha
dumping in Peruvian cosmology,
but really it's much
more sacred than that.
It's not a great title for it.
Hucha is the Quechua
word for heavy energy.
And they don't think of things
as negative and positive.
They see it literally
as light and heavy.
It has a different density,
a different quality.
>> LILOU: Yeah.
>> MACKAIL: So you open your
spiritual stomach two fingers
below your belly button, and you
allow like a Hoover tube to go
out from your stomach deep
into the Earth below us.
So we'll have to go down
a few feet from this flat.
And we really put that
Hoover tube into the Earth.
And literally like a
Hoover, like a vacuum,
the Earth with its
gravitational magnetic force
is just going to
very gently suck
all the anxiety, the doubt,
the worry, the heaviness just
into the Earth.
This is ayni.
This is a sacred act of love.
What you're doing
is you're feeding
the Earth with your love,
with your heavy energy.
Because, like we get
manna from heaven--
we tend to look up to
the angels, don't we?
If we're looking for help,
we do tend to look up.
We don't go, oh,
help me, help me.
We go, help me, help me.
So we know somehow intuitively
that the lighter energies
are from the solar deities, from
the heavens, forces, whatever.
So we pull that in.
But the Earth gets
lights from us.
And the Earth can
mulch that hucha,
and the Earth can extract
light from the hucha.
So our heavy energy is
like light to the mother.
So it's like, oh, give
all that heaviness
to the mother with love,
really send it with love
down that tube, and
let her suck out.
Because she's just like,
oh, feed me the light.
Feed me your love.
And at the same time, you
open the crown of your head,
like the lotus flower opening
with its 1,000 petals,
and you let that
higher light energy in.
You don't ever want
to empty yourself out
without filling
yourself back up.
So you inhale that beautiful
high light vibration and exhale
through your sacral tube
into the Earth with love,
just letting go of all the
doubt, the anxiety, the worry,
the junk you've held onto.
And you can do this
anytime, anyplace, anywhere.
I do it on the Tube, in the car,
up 10,000 feet in an airplane.
Any time I'm feeling
a bit ugh, ugh, ugh,
just let go of the hucha.
And when you're done, bring
your crown back to a bud,
bring the Hoover tube
back up, and just close
your spiritual
stomach so that you've
sealed your entry points.
But great simple
little exercise.
It's good practice of
ayni, and it really
keeps your energy system clear.
>> LILOU: Guilt-free too,
because the Earth loves it.
>> MACKAIL: The
Earth does love it.
>> LILOU: Nice one.
Oh, I love it.
So what we don't
deal with right now,
in the nighttime it just
comes back in our dream,
basically, if we don't deal
with it in the daytime?
>> MACKAIL: That
often happens, yeah.
But only if it it's an issue.
If it's something
that is resonating
with your particular psychology,
your particular emotional pain
body, for example,
then, yeah, it's
going to show up in your dream
if something triggered that.
Sometimes we can just have
what Freud would term day
residue dreams where
we've just been too busy,
just running, running,
running, running, running.
And then our dreams
are just processing
what we haven't had
time to process.
So you will get
weird sensations.
You've been to the shop, but
it will suddenly be purple
or there'll be an
elephant in there
or just random,
those crazy dreams.
But when you look
at them, you're
thinking, oh, that is what
I actually did yesterday,
just in a bit of
dream craziness.
And so sometimes you just
think, oh, no, that's
just processing my day.
I don't have to look at that.
It is intuitive.
It is something that only
really through working with them
that you get into the depth
of understanding them.
It's something that
comes with experience,
and you get a feel
for, oh, yeah,
that's that kind of dream.
That's that dream.
Yeah, I do want to
look at that one.
I know there's
significance in that.
>> LILOU: So "Dream Whisperer,"
that's is an interesting title.
Because at the same time, I
guess, we whisper our dream,
but we receive also the dream.
It's like being both.
>> MACKAIL: Exactly.
That's why it is that title.
>> LILOU: Beautiful.
Is there a last
thing that you would
like to leave us with or
some aspect of the book
or of your message that we
didn't cover or talk about that
is essential to understand
this whole world
and what you're
sharing with us today?
>> MACKAIL: Just love
yourselves more, really.
I just think all
of us need to be
kinder and more
loving to ourselves.
Because it's like when you look
in the mirror and see a frown,
there is only one way
to change that frown,
and that's smile at yourself.
>> LILOU: Yeah.
>> MACKAIL: And when
you smile at yourself,
the world smiles back.
We get so stuck in
our pain body of I'm
not going to let anyone in.
I'm going to close myself off.
I'm a hurt victim.
I've been abused.
I've had bad things
happen to me.
So what?
Shit happens.
Be open.
Just keep opening, keep
opening, keep opening.
That is the only way
to set yourself free.
>> LILOU: Beautiful.
Thank you so much, Davina.
>> MACKAIL: Pleasure.
It's been a real
pleasure to talk to you.
>> LILOU: Big, big kisses to
all juicy co-creators watching
this.
This is the dream whisperer.
I feel you are one too.
We're all, right?
We're all?
>> MACKAIL: We are.
We are all dream
whisperers, indeed.
>> LILOU: Ooh la la.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Big, big kisses to
all of you guys.
If you want to comment or
talk about your dreams,
even, put your
dreams underneath.
This is nice to be
actively sharing all this.
And big, big kisses
to all of you.
Much love from beautiful London.
Bye bye.